FastAPI Backend with RedisAI and Modular AI Agents: Implementation Plan

Architecture Overview

Figure: High-level retrieval-augmented architecture integrating vector search and LLM capabilities. User prompts are converted to embeddings (via an in-memory model), relevant context is retrieved from a Redis vector index, and the prompt is augmented before final response generation by the LLM.

The system is composed of a FastAPI backend that handles real-time client interactions (chat messages and editor events) via WebSockets, a Redis instance (with RedisAI and RediSearch modules) for AI computations and data storage, and modular AI “agents” orchestrated by LangChain/LangGraph. Client applications (a Chat UI and an Editor UI) connect to the FastAPI server using WebSockets for bidirectional, low-latency communication. The FastAPI service interacts with Redis for vector searches, autocomplete caching, and model inference, leveraging RedisAI to serve models directly from memory ￼. An observability component, Langfuse, is integrated for tracing and collecting user feedback on AI responses. All components are containerized with Docker for ease of deployment and scaling. The architecture supports horizontal scaling: multiple FastAPI instances can run behind a load balancer, coordinating through Redis Pub/Sub to ensure all clients receive updates in real time. This design balances performance (in-memory data and models for low latency), modularity (separable concerns for WebSocket handling, AI logic, and logging), and scalability (stateless frontends with a centralized state/compute store in Redis).

WebSocket API for Chat and Editor

The backend exposes WebSocket endpoints to support real-time interactions in both a chat interface and a text editor interface. These persistent connections allow the server to push AI-generated content (chat replies or editor suggestions) to clients as soon as they are available, enabling a seamless, interactive experience. WebSocket messages use a JSON schema to distinguish between message types (e.g. user message, AI response, editor context, suggestion result), ensuring a consistent protocol for both chat and editor features.

Endpoints:
	•	/ws/chat – Upgrades to a WebSocket connection for the chat application. Clients send user messages (with fields like session_id, message_text, etc.), and the server responds with streaming AI replies. The connection remains open for the duration of the chat session, allowing multiple back-and-forth messages.
	•	/ws/editor – WebSocket endpoint for the editor assistive features. The editor client sends events such as “document context” (e.g. the current text around the cursor or a code snippet) or triggers (like a request for autocomplete). The server returns AI-generated suggestions or completions. This endpoint supports continuous updates; for example, as the user pauses typing, the client can send the latest context and receive updated autocomplete suggestions in real time.

Data Flow:
	1.	Client-to-Server: The client application establishes a WebSocket and sends an initial message (e.g. authentication or session info if required). Thereafter, each user action is sent as a JSON message. In chat, this might be {"type": "user_message", "content": "Hello, ...", "session_id": "...", ...}. In the editor, this could be {"type": "editor_context", "content": "<current document snippet>", "cursor_position": 123, ...} or an explicit request like {"type": "autocomplete_request", "prefix": "pri"} for code completion. The FastAPI server immediately acknowledges critical fields (or sends a ping/pong as needed to keep connection alive).
	2.	Server Processing: The FastAPI backend hands off the incoming message to the AI agent logic. For chat messages, this involves passing the user query to the LangChain/LangGraph-based agent which may perform tool calls (e.g. vector DB lookup) and then generate a reply. For editor requests, the backend queries the RedisAI-hosted model for code or text completion (possibly after looking up cached completions or related context in Redis). This processing is done asynchronously so as not to block the WebSocket event loop.
	3.	Real-time Response Streaming: As soon as the AI begins producing output, the server streams partial results back over the WebSocket. In chat, the client might start receiving a "type": "ai_response_chunk" message with a piece of the answer, enabling a typing indicator or streaming text effect. In the editor, the server might send a suggested completion as soon as it’s ready (e.g. {"type": "suggestion", "content": "print('Hello World')", "position": 123}), which the frontend can render as ghost text. For multi-turn tools, intermediate status messages (like “searching documents…” or function call results) could also be sent.
	4.	Session Maintenance: The WebSocket API is designed to be largely stateless on the server, with any needed state (like conversation history or document content) included in messages or stored in Redis. A session_id or similar token identifies the conversation or editing session, allowing multiple connections or reconnections to attach to the same context. This stateless design and externalization of state make it easier to scale the WebSocket servers horizontally, since any instance can handle messages for any session given access to Redis.

Overall, the WebSocket API ensures that chat interactions feel instantaneous and that editor suggestions update live as the user types. Unlike a traditional request/response cycle, the persistent WebSocket avoids repeated HTTP overhead and enables the server to push new data without explicit client polling. This real-time channel is fundamental for a smooth UX in both collaborative chat and AI-assisted editing.

RedisAI for Vector Search, Autocomplete Caching, and AI Model Hosting

All AI-related tasks are offloaded to Redis, using the RedisAI module and Redis Stack features to achieve fast in-memory computation. RedisAI serves a triple role here: acting as a vector database for semantic search, caching recent computations (like prompt embeddings or completions), and hosting ML models for on-demand inference ￼. By centralizing these functions in Redis, we minimize data movement and leverage Redis’s speed and concurrency features. Below are the major AI functionalities and how Redis supports them:
	•	Vector Search (Semantic Retrieval): The system implements Retrieval-Augmented Generation for the chat agent. A corpus of documents or knowledge (for example, project documentation or user-specific data) is pre-processed into embedding vectors using an embedding model. These embeddings are stored in Redis (using the RediSearch vector index capability). When the AI agent needs contextual information (e.g. to answer a question or resolve code references), it generates an embedding for the query (using a small model hosted in RedisAI or via a cached result) and performs a vector similarity search in Redis. Redis’s in-memory vector search can find the nearest relevant documents in milliseconds ￼. The results (top-K relevant vectors with their source text) are then fed into the agent’s prompt construction. This enables the AI to ground its responses on up-to-date data. By using Redis for the vector store, we ensure sub-millisecond retrieval and the ability to scale to millions of embedding vectors with minimal latency. The vector search occurs entirely within Redis’s memory space, avoiding expensive external calls and taking advantage of fast similarity search algorithms provided by RediSearch.
	•	Autocomplete Caching: The system caches frequent or recent prompts and their completions in Redis to accelerate autocomplete suggestions. This semantic cache stores mappings from a prompt (or its vector representation) to a model output, so that if a similar prompt appears later, the system can reuse the result instead of recomputing it ￼. For instance, in the editor scenario, if the user has repeatedly started typing a common code snippet or sentence, the backend can detect a high similarity to a cached prefix and instantly return the previously generated continuation. This caching reduces model load and latency for repetitive tasks. We use Redis data structures (such as a Hash or JSON document for prompt->completion, plus a vector index for semantic similarity matching of prompts) to implement the cache. Because Redis is in-memory and optimized for fast lookups, the autocomplete suggestions can be retrieved in real time, keeping up with the user’s typing speed. In effect, this acts like a memory for the AI, enabling it to recall recent answers or code completions (even across sessions, if desired) to serve users faster and reduce unnecessary computation ￼. Policies will be defined for cache invalidation or expiration to ensure stale suggestions don’t persist indefinitely (for example, tying cache entries to specific model versions or embedding them with a timestamp).
	•	AI Model Hosting (Inference in RedisAI): One core innovation is hosting the AI models directly in Redis using RedisAI. Rather than calling out to external model APIs, we load our models (such as a generative LLM for chat completion, and possibly a smaller code model for the editor) into RedisAI at startup. RedisAI supports popular model formats (TorchScript, ONNX, TensorFlow) and can execute them on CPUs or GPUs. By doing this, inference requests (both for generating embeddings and for generating text) are processed inside the Redis process, right where the data (vectors, cache) lives. This eliminates network overhead between the application server and the model and leverages Redis’s efficient memory management. According to RedisAI’s design, it enables real-time execution of models with minimal latency by keeping models and data in-memory ￼. For example, the chat agent’s Transformer model and the embedding model are loaded as RedisAI model objects. When the FastAPI backend needs a prediction, it issues a RedisAI command (via the Redis client) to run the model on given inputs (e.g. run the embedding model on a piece of text, or run the GPT-style model on the current prompt). RedisAI returns the result (embedding vector or generated text tensor) which the backend then formats appropriately. This tight integration provides inference at speed, leveraging Redis’s in-memory nature for rapid response ￼. It also simplifies deployment since we manage one less external service for model serving – everything happens within the Redis container.
	•	Future Integration – Triton Server (TODO): While RedisAI suffices for initial deployment, we plan to integrate NVIDIA Triton Inference Server in the future for more scalable and flexible model serving. Triton would allow easy deployment of newer model architectures and batching of requests for high throughput. The idea is to offload heavy model inference to a Triton server (especially if we incorporate larger models that might not fit or run efficiently inside Redis). We will maintain the same abstractions: the FastAPI agent code would call an internal service (Triton or RedisAI) for inference. A possible approach is to switch the embedding and LLM calls to use Triton gRPC endpoints once they are set up, while still using Redis for caching and vector search. For now, RedisAI is the unified solution handling both data and models; as a TODO, we include configuration hooks to redirect model execution to Triton when available (for example, an environment flag that if set, uses Triton URL for inference calls). This modular design will let us experiment with Triton in staging without changing the core business logic. In summary, RedisAI provides a real-time AI serving engine within our data layer today ￼, and we have a pathway to migrate to a dedicated inference server (Triton) as needed.

Modular AI Agents with LangGraph & LangChain

To handle the reasoning and decision-making for user requests, we implement modular AI agents using LangChain for tool abstraction and LangGraph for advanced control flow. The AI agent is structured to be extensible – it can invoke different “tools” (functions or actions like searching the vector database, calling an external API, or executing code) based on the user’s input and the conversation context. We start with a simple agent that can answer questions and provide coding assistance using a fixed set of tools (e.g. a vector search tool and a math/calculation tool), and we incrementally add more capabilities over time.

Agent Architecture: At its core, the agent follows the ReAct (Reason+Act) paradigm: it will receive the user’s input, think about which action to take (this thinking is powered by an LLM prompt that we craft), invoke a tool, observe the result, and repeat this cycle until it formulates a final answer for the user ￼. LangChain provides the scaffolding for this – tools are defined with a name and function, and the agent’s LLM uses the observation/result to decide the next step. For more complex workflows (like multi-step tasks or conditional branching logic), we employ LangGraph. LangGraph allows representing the agent’s decision process as a graph of nodes (each node could be a sub-agent, a tool invocation, or a conditional) rather than a simple sequence ￼ ￼. This graph-based approach is useful as we start to chain multiple operations. For example, an “Editor Agent” might first use a linting tool on the code, then use a vector search tool to find relevant documentation, then ask the LLM to suggest improvements. LangGraph enables persistent state across these nodes, so the agent can maintain context throughout a multi-step workflow.

Tool Integration: Initially, we will integrate a few key tools:
	•	Vector DB Retrieval Tool: This tool queries Redis for relevant documents given a question (essentially wraps the vector search functionality described earlier). The agent uses it whenever it needs more information to answer a query (e.g. “According to our docs, what does X mean?” triggers a retrieval).
	•	Search/Browser Tool: (If appropriate) to allow the agent to fetch information from the web or documentation not stored in the vector DB. This could be a simplified web scraper or an API caller.
	•	Code Execution or Calculation Tool: For the editor, an agent might need to run a code snippet or evaluate an expression (for instance, to show the result of a computation or verify a suggestion). A sandboxed execution environment can be wrapped as a tool.
	•	Memory Tool: LangChain supports short-term memory (storing the conversation) by default, but for long-term memory we could integrate a memory module (possibly backed by Redis as well).

Each tool is implemented as a Python function or class that the LangChain agent can call. LangChain’s agent framework will include these in the context it gives to the LLM (essentially telling the model: “You have these tools: e.g., Search(query) for web search, VectorSearch(query) for knowledge lookup, etc.”). Depending on user input, the LLM will dynamically choose which, if any, tool to use ￼. The modular design here means we can add new tools without rewriting the entire agent: as new needs arise (say integrating an email-sending capability or a database query tool), we implement the tool and register it with the agent’s configuration.

LangGraph for Advanced Workflows: While LangChain on its own handles the basic agent loop, LangGraph comes into play for orchestrating multiple agents or complex branching logic. For example, we might have one agent specialized in conversational Q&A and another specialized in writing code. A router agent can be implemented (using LangGraph’s multi-agent coordination features) to route the user’s query to the appropriate specialist. LangGraph excels in these scenarios with multiple agents, conditional logic, or iterative loops ￼. Over time, as we see the types of tasks users ask for, we can expand the graph: e.g. if a task involves both conversation and document editing, the workflow might branch to use both the Chat Agent and the Editor Agent in sequence. The graph can even include human-in-the-loop nodes – for instance, flagging an ambiguous request for a human to approve an AI action (LangGraph has features for human approval steps ￼). We will start with a relatively simple graph (essentially linear, as a single agent loop) and gradually enhance it. The incremental approach ensures we have a working system early, then add complexity in a controlled manner. Each new tool or agent is added as a new node or branch in the LangGraph workflow, which can be visually reasoned about and tested in isolation.

Throughout, we leverage LangChain’s integration points and LangGraph’s orchestration to maintain clarity. LangGraph integrates with LangChain’s components and even with tracing tools like LangSmith for monitoring ￼ (in our case, we’ll use Langfuse for a similar purpose – see next section). By structuring the AI logic in this modular way, we ensure that adding a new capability (e.g. the ability to draw on a new data source or perform a new kind of task) doesn’t require a full rewrite, but just plugging in a new component. This modularity and the use of well-supported frameworks also aids debugging and optimization, as we can trace agent decisions and improve individual tools independently.

Feedback and Tracing with Langfuse

To continuously improve the AI agents and ensure transparency, we integrate Langfuse for collecting feedback and tracing the internal operations of the system. Langfuse is an open-source platform that helps teams debug and improve LLM applications by providing detailed traces of each request and tooling to capture user feedback ￼. We will deploy a self-hosted Langfuse server (via Docker) and use its SDK/API to log events from our FastAPI backend.

Tracing Interactions: Each user session (chat conversation or editing session) will generate a trace in Langfuse. As the agent processes a request, key steps are recorded – for example, the prompt given to the LLM, the tools invoked and their outputs, and the final answer produced. Langfuse’s tracing APIs will be called at these points in the code. For instance, right before calling the LLM, we log an event “LLM prompt created” with the prompt content; after the LLM responds, we log “LLM response” with maybe token usage metadata; when a tool is used, we log an event for that action, and so on. These traces can later be viewed in the Langfuse web UI to understand how the agent arrived at a particular answer. This is crucial for debugging complex agent behavior (especially as we add more tools and branches) and for identifying where things may go wrong (e.g. the agent made an incorrect assumption or the model gave a poor answer despite correct tool use).

User Feedback Collection: We present users with simple feedback mechanisms in the UI – for example, a thumbs-up / thumbs-down button on each answer, or an option to correct the AI’s answer. When a user provides explicit feedback (positive or negative), the front-end will send this feedback to the backend (likely via a small HTTP endpoint or over the WebSocket with a specific message type). The FastAPI backend then records this feedback in Langfuse by attaching a score or annotation to the trace of that answer. Langfuse supports capturing categorical feedback like thumbs up/down as a score on a trace ￼. In practice, we’ll use the Langfuse SDK’s method to log a score (e.g. +1 for thumbs-up, -1 for thumbs-down, or a boolean flag) associated with the trace ID of the answer in question. Additionally, if the user corrects the answer or provides the expected correct output, we capture that text as an annotation on the trace (so we know what the ideal answer was). Over time, this feedback data will be invaluable for evaluating the AI’s performance and guiding improvements (for example, if many users mark a certain type of answer as unhelpful, we can analyze those cases in Langfuse to see what went wrong).

Suggestion Acceptance/Rejection: In the editor scenario, another form of feedback is whether the user accepted an AI suggestion. For instance, if the AI autocompletes a line of code and the user presses “Tab” to accept it, that’s positive implicit feedback on that suggestion; if they ignore or delete it, that implies it wasn’t useful. We instrument the editor front-end to notify the backend when suggestions are accepted or rejected. These events too are logged in Langfuse (perhaps as a custom event type or as a special kind of feedback score). By tracking acceptance rates of suggestions, we can measure how helpful the editor agent is. For example, an accepted suggestion could increment a “success” counter for that suggestion’s trace, while a rejection could either decrement a score or log a separate “rejected” event. Langfuse’s data model is flexible enough to store these alongside the main trace of the interaction, giving us a full picture of each suggestion’s life cycle from generation to user action.

Utilizing the Data: The Langfuse integration not only collects data but will also be used to tune the system over time. We plan periodic reviews of Langfuse dashboards to spot trends – e.g. which tools are most used, how often the AI asks for retrieval, how long responses take, and of course the user satisfaction signals. This telemetry can feed back into development: we might adjust prompts if we see the AI tends to ramble (trace would show long outputs that get thumbs-down), or add new tools if we observe the AI struggling to perform certain tasks. We also ensure that any errors or exceptions in the agent (like a tool failure) are logged to Langfuse, so we have a centralized error tracing as well. By self-hosting Langfuse, we maintain control over potentially sensitive interaction data (since user queries and AI responses may be proprietary) while still benefiting from a rich analytics and tracing platform.

In summary, Langfuse provides the observability and feedback loop necessary for a modern AI system: it gives us visibility into the black-box of LLM reasoning and a channel for users to guide the AI’s evolution via feedback. All thumbs-ups, corrections, and other signals are aggregated to measure overall quality ￼ and can be used to benchmark improvements or regressions in new versions of our AI agent.

Real-Time Processing with WebSockets and Redis Pub/Sub

Real-time message processing in our system is achieved by combining WebSockets (for the client connection) with Redis Pub/Sub (for server-side message distribution). This design ensures that even as we scale out to multiple server instances or separate worker processes, all parts of the system stay in sync in delivering live updates to users. The core idea is that whenever an event occurs that should be pushed to a user (e.g. an AI response is ready, or a long-running tool has produced an intermediate result), we publish that event to a Redis channel that the appropriate WebSocket connection is subscribed to. This decouples message production from consumption and facilitates horizontal scaling.

Figure: Real-time chat architecture with Redis Pub/Sub and WebSocket servers (from a two-tier example). In our implementation, the FastAPI server itself may handle both web and WebSocket duties, but we similarly use Redis to publish messages and have WebSocket handlers subscribe to them for instant delivery to clients.

In practice, upon startup each FastAPI instance will create a Redis Pub/Sub subscription to a channel (or pattern of channels) corresponding to messages it needs to handle. One approach is to use user- or session-specific channels (for example, channel:<session_id> for each active session). When a user connects, the server generates or reuses a session ID and subscribes that WebSocket connection to channel:<session_id>. The mapping of active WebSocket connections is maintained in memory (a dictionary mapping session IDs to WebSocket objects). Now, when a new user message comes in via WebSocket, the server not only begins processing it (via the AI agent) but also publishes the message to a Redis channel (like a global chat_requests channel). Worker processes (which could be separate from the FastAPI app, or just background tasks in the same app) subscribe to this chat_requests channel to pick up work. By publishing user inputs, we ensure any number of workers can listen and share the load of AI processing. Once the AI agent computes a response (or a chunk of it), that worker publishes the result to a response channel, e.g. channel:<session_id>. The FastAPI server instance holding the WebSocket for that session will receive that message through its Redis subscription and immediately forward it to the client over WebSocket. This pattern effectively turns our WebSocket layer into a distributed publish/subscribe system, where Redis is the broker coordinating messages among potentially many backend components and WebSocket clients ￼ ￼.

Advantages of this approach:
	•	Scalability: If we run multiple FastAPI instances (on different machines or containers), all can subscribe to the needed Redis channels. A user might be connected to instance A, but their request could be processed by a worker on instance B; the result published to Redis will still reach instance A and thus the user. The use of Redis Pub/Sub means we don’t have to sticky-route users to the same process for long-running tasks. It also allows adding background worker services that don’t handle WebSockets at all (e.g. a dedicated AI worker service) – those workers communicate results via Redis and whichever WebSocket server has the client will deliver it. This was inspired by known patterns in real-time systems where Redis is used to broadcast messages across websockets in a cluster, enabling near-instant delivery without straining the primary web server ￼.
	•	Performance: Redis Pub/Sub operates in memory and is very fast. The publication of messages through Redis adds minimal overhead but greatly reduces complexity in the backend. Instead of the FastAPI process multitasking between handling WebSocket I/O and heavy AI computation, the AI computation can be offloaded to a separate context (possibly another process or thread) that, when done, simply pushes to Redis. The web server stays responsive to handle other clients or additional messages. Redis can handle high message throughput and ensures messages are delivered to subscribers at-most-once, which is acceptable for our use case (if a message is dropped due to a network hiccup, the client can always request again or the session can be recovered). We also avoid long-lived compute on the event loop, preventing blocking.
	•	Simplicity of Development: Using the Pub/Sub model, our code becomes easier to reason about. The WebSocket endpoint code doesn’t need to know about the details of AI generation; it just passes the message along (publish) and waits for results to come back (subscribe). Conversely, the AI agent code can be written as a normal function that takes an input and returns an output, without worrying about WebSocket protocols – a small wrapper will publish its output when ready. This separation follows the Single Responsibility Principle and makes testing each part easier. We can simulate messages on the Redis channel to test WebSocket delivery logic and test the AI agent function independently by feeding it inputs.

Event-Driven Updates: Both chat and editor features benefit from this. In chat, for example, if an answer requires multiple steps (tool use etc.), the agent can publish intermediate status (like “Searching knowledge base…”) which gets relayed to the user as a status message. In the editor, as the user types, we might continuously publish their partial document to a channel that triggers background analysis (like syntax checking or finding relevant code examples); when the analysis is done, a message is published (with results or suggestions) that the editor front-end will display in real-time. This architecture is essentially event-driven – any significant action (new message, completion ready, suggestion applied, etc.) results in an event on Redis, which the interested parties are listening for. The use of WebSockets to send these events to the client ensures low latency delivery, creating a real-time feedback loop.

By using WebSockets + Redis Pub/Sub together, we get a durable and scalable real-time pipeline: Redis decouples producers and consumers of events, and WebSockets provide the live link to the end-user. This approach has been proven in similar distributed systems (for instance, real-time translation services use a very similar pattern with a translation worker pool listening on Redis ￼). We will implement robust error handling in this flow – e.g., if a WebSocket disconnects, the server will unsubscribe from Redis for that session and workers will know not to send messages to that channel (or messages will just go nowhere and be cleaned up). Likewise, if Redis is temporarily unavailable, the server can fall back to direct processing (with an appropriate alert). However, in normal operation, this setup will efficiently handle high loads and multiple concurrent sessions, all while keeping latency to a minimum for the end user.

Docker-Based Deployment Strategy

To ensure the system is easy to deploy and scale, we containerize each component and provide a Docker Compose configuration. Containerization guarantees that all parts of the system (FastAPI app, Redis with its modules, Langfuse, etc.) run with consistent environments and can be orchestrated together. The deployment strategy focuses on modularity (each service in a separate container) and scalability (ability to increase replicas of stateless services like the API or workers).

Docker Containers:
	•	FastAPI App Container: This container runs our backend application (the WebSocket server and agent logic). It’s built from a Python base image, installing FastAPI, Uvicorn, LangChain/LangGraph, Redis client libs, and other dependencies. The Dockerfile will expose port 80 (or 8000) for the API/WebSocket. We ensure to include configuration via environment variables for things like Redis connection URL, model file paths, etc. This container is stateless – it doesn’t store any data locally – so we can run multiple replicas behind a load balancer. In a Compose file, we might scale this service to N instances when needed. Uvicorn with an async workers setup will be used to handle high concurrency on each instance.
	•	Redis Stack Container (with RedisAI): We use the official Redis Stack image (which includes RediSearch, RedisJSON, etc.) and additionally enable the RedisAI module. This can be done by using a custom Redis image or mounting a RedisAI module .so file into a Redis container and loading it on startup. For simplicity, there are images like redislabs/redisai:latest which we can use directly ￼. This container will expose the Redis port (6379) to the other services. We will configure persistent storage for Redis (a volume mount) if we want to retain data (like cached embeddings or conversation history) between restarts, though for pure caching use-cases this might not be critical. In production, if high availability is needed, Redis could be switched to a managed or clustered setup, but for our initial deployment a single instance is fine.
	•	Langfuse Container: We deploy Langfuse (open-source edition) as a separate service. Langfuse itself likely uses a database (e.g. PostgreSQL) to store traces – depending on Langfuse’s deployment guide, we might run an additional Postgres container or use an embedded storage. The Langfuse container provides a web UI and an ingestion API. It will be configured with a persistent volume (for its DB) and secured behind our network (since it contains potentially sensitive logs). The FastAPI app will be given the Langfuse endpoint and API keys via environment variables so it can send data. Running Langfuse in Docker ensures we can easily include it in our dev and prod environments and it can scale or be updated independently.
	•	Worker Containers (Optional): If we decide to separate the AI processing into background workers (instead of threads within FastAPI), we will have a container (using the same codebase) that starts a process consuming from Redis (Pub/Sub or a Redis Queue). This worker would not expose any ports, it would just run the agent loop for incoming messages and publish results. Scaling workers is as simple as running more of these containers. This gives flexibility to allocate more CPU/GPU resources to the AI processing part without affecting the web interface part. In Docker Compose, we can scale the worker service independently of the FastAPI service.

All these services are defined in a docker-compose.yml for easy one-command startup. For example:

version: '3.8'
services:
  api:
    build: ./backend
    ports:
      - "8000:8000"
    environment:
      REDIS_URL: "redis://redis:6379"
      LANGFUSE_URL: "http://langfuse:3000"
      LANGFUSE_API_KEY: "${LANGFUSE_API_KEY}"
    depends_on:
      - redis
      - langfuse
  redis:
    image: redislabs/redisai:latest        # Redis with RedisAI (includes Redis Stack features)
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    volumes:
      - redis-data:/data
  langfuse:
    image: langfuse/langfuse:latest
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    environment:
      DATABASE_URL: "postgres://langfuse:password@postgres:5432/langfuse"
    depends_on:
      - postgres
  postgres:
    image: postgres:15-alpine
    environment:
      POSTGRES_DB: "langfuse"
      POSTGRES_USER: "langfuse"
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: "password"
    volumes:
      - pg-data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
volumes:
  redis-data:
  pg-data:

(This is a simplified example; in practice, environment variables and credentials would be managed securely.)

In the above, the FastAPI api service depends on Redis and Langfuse. We set the Redis URL to the internal hostname of the Redis service. If we have separate worker services, they would look similar to the api service (probably using the same image but a different start command, e.g. command: python -m app.worker), also depending on Redis.

Scalability and Expansion: Docker Compose allows us to scale out the stateless parts easily. For instance, in a production scenario, we might run 3 replicas of the FastAPI app (docker-compose up --scale api=3) behind a load balancer. Since all of them connect to the same Redis, and use Pub/Sub for coordination, the WebSocket sessions can be distributed among them without issue. Similarly, we could scale up workers if using, or even run multiple Redis nodes (though that would involve a Redis cluster configuration, not just Compose). The modular container setup also makes it straightforward to deploy additional microservices in the future – for example, if we integrate Triton Server for model serving, we can add a Triton container to the compose file and adjust environment configs for the API/worker to use Triton for inference requests. Each component (FastAPI, Redis, Langfuse) can be updated or replaced independently as long as it adheres to the agreed interface (e.g., if we swapped Redis for another vector DB, we’d update the API code but the deployment would just replace the Redis service with a new service).

Deployment Environments: In development, the entire stack can be brought up with Docker on a single machine. For staging/production, we can use the same images on a Kubernetes cluster or other orchestration – the Compose file can be translated to Helm charts or similar, preserving the separation of concerns. Environment variables and secrets will be managed via the orchestration platform. Logging from each container can be aggregated (we may include a logging stack or rely on the cloud platform’s logging).

By using Docker, we also ensure new developers or testers can spin up the whole system quickly without manual setup of each piece – this improves maintainability and reduces “works on my machine” issues. It aligns with the goal of a structured implementation; each module (web server, AI engine, tracer) is clearly delineated and can be developed somewhat independently and then combined. This containerization strategy, coupled with the real-time architecture and feedback systems described above, results in a robust, scalable backend ready to support evolving AI-driven features.  ￼